🎃 DIGITPAIN: *New* Smart Contract Thoughts

Giving the future of my painting practice quite a bit of thought tonight... 🌙

I'd like to focus mainly on collaborative digital painting where me and my
friends can make pictures together in our own way. I can credit them in my
metadata and add or remove wallet addresses as I please when minting each token,
in order to do splits based on agreed percentages.

Many of the works in RDP are collaborative and this is where I saw my practice
was headed, back when I was in the midst of that period from 2016-2019.

***5 BRIEF CONCEPTUAL POINTS***

1. I see these new paintings getting both produced and credited in novel ways.

2. I want to to experiment with different methods of collaboration.

3. I think about these paintings as if they were Hollywood films.

  The collab credits for a group figurative painting might look like:

    HEAD: DIGITPAIN     `The painter who plotted the head
    BODY: JULIA         `and the body
    BACKGROUND: ARTUR   `with mountains,
    WILDLIFE: ALEX      `foliage, and animals.

    GLAZE: SAGE         `Shader code for the surface to be lit.
    FRAME: NICK         `3D Substrate for texture mapping the image on.

4. One might eventually require a crew of 40 people!

5. But usually my "squad" will be small.

So I think that means I need a contract with lots of flexibility in terms of
supporting different splits per token.

1️⃣ Features
* Every DIGITPAIN that gets minted can have tailored / bespoke splits.
* People should be able to mint right off the website DIGITPAIN.COM.
  - I'll do the frontend UI and backend, but may need a bit of a hand with the
    web3 integration.

2️⃣ Questions
* Can I loop in holders of my previous tokens on a per mint basis?
* Such as...
  - Giving a small percentage of every new painting's revenue to holders of
    previous work: (Radical Digital Painting, Tumpin, Ten Minute Painting)
  - Reserving work for holders of a specific token in a collection.
  - What else?

2022.05.07.01.18 (Still thinking...)