Wiring: Prototyping Physical Interaction Design
Hernando Barragán
Master's Thesis, Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, June 2004

---

Hernando Barragán | Interaction Design Institute Ivrea | June 2004
h.barragan@interaction-ivrea.it

Wiring: Prototyping Physical Interaction Design

Thesis Committee

Massimo Banzi . Associate Professor
Primary advisor

Casey Reas . Visiting Assistant Professor
UCLA Design | Media Arts,
Secondary advisor

Gillian Crampton Smith . Director

Andrew Davidson . Chair of the Academic Programme

Wiring: Prototyping Physical Interaction Design
Hernando Barragán

0. Abstract

0.1 Problem
Design education and practice increasingly rely on digital technology. For designers to successfully enter this domain they need to understand the inherent qualities in the media they
work with, such as electronics and software. Current prototyping tools for electronics and programming are mostly targeted to engineering, robotics and technical audiences. They are hard
to learn, and the programming languages are far from useful in contexts outside a specific
technology. Designers need a teaching language and electronics prototyping system that facilitates and encourages the process of learning, that reduces the struggle with electronics
design and programming, and that are powerful and flexible enough for the needs of Interaction Design.

0.2 What is it
Wiring is both a programming environment and an electronics prototyping input/output board
for exploring the electronic arts and tangible media. It can also be used to teach and learn
computer programming and prototyping with electronics. It illustrates the concept of programming with electronics and the physical realm of hardware control which are necessary
to explore physical interaction design and tangible media aspects in the design discipline.
The Wiring software and the hardware designs of the Wiring electronic input/output board will
be freely available for download on the Web. Users will have access to the Wiring electronic in-

put/output board as well. The site contains a reference, and a number of short prototypical examples that explore the media and illustrate the code and the electronics diagrams allowing
users to learn by experimenting with them.
Wiring builds on Processing, the open source programming language developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab and Interaction Design Institute Ivrea by Ben
Fry and Casey Reas. People who learn how to program using Processing can instantly move
to program in Wiring and then to other languages or scripting environments like Java, C, C++,
JavaScript, Flash or Director.
While working on their design concepts, users will be able to sketch, test their ideas and prototype them, by writing small programs and downloading them to the input/output board.
The Wiring input/output board is a general purpose electronic system that includes a microcontroller where the users’ programs will run. It provides digital and analog inputs and outputs and functionality that will allow users to interface all kind of sensors and actuators and
program the behaviors needed in their projects.
This project aims to support education not only in the design and art schools but also
in different types of learning environments and different types of practices. It will enable users to quickly prototype their ideas and concepts in the physical world, allowing users to concentrate on the quality of their designs, the interaction, ideas, or concepts being illustrated, rather than concentrate on showing that the technology works.
It will contribute to sharing ideas and knowledge with the wider community of interaction
design and in general to others outside this field. Because it builds on the Processing language,
it will take advantage of the existing online community of users around the world and their
collective experience. It also builds on my previous professional experience as engineer artist
and designer.

Wiring: Prototyping Physical Interaction Design
Hernando Barragán

Acknowledgments

This thesis is dedicated to my huge family, (too many to name you all guys), especially to my
grandparents Rafael y Maria, and my grandparents Antonio y Edelmira who both passed away
while I was here.
I am extremely grateful to Casey Reas for his support and encouragement; It’s been an honor
to have him as mentor and friend and a constant source of inspiration and perspective, thank
you. I thank Massimo Banzi for his support. I also thank all the members of the community at
Interaction Design Institute Ivrea past and present for their valuable insights: Gillian Crampton Smith, Andy Davidson, Bill Verplank, Jan-Christoph Zoels, Stefano Mirti, Reed Kram, Clemens Weisshaar, Edoardo Brambilla, Simona Maschi, Britta Boland, Nathan Shedroff, Molly Write
Steenson, Camille Norment, Durrell Bishop, Anthony Dunne, Fiona Raby, Dag Svanæs, Peppino
Ortoleva. I thank all the IDII community who directly or indirectly contributed to my education
and life in the last two years. Thanks to Linda Norlen and Christian Palino for their support in
the elaboration of this document.
Thanks to Tiberio Hernandez for being my mentor, for his vision and always letting me do
whatever it comes to my mind, Rafael Gomez for sharing his passion for programming and
hardware, and Rodrigo Cardoso for his wisdom.
Thanks to Ben Fry, the Processing development team, Mauricio Giraldo, Brian Dean, Peter Gasparik, Alberto Alberton, Pascal Stang, Dan O’Sullivan, Tom Igoe, Michal Rinott, Karmen Franinovic, Myriel Milicevic, Maya Lotan and the Internet guys for their support.A big thanks goes to
my class, who have been an amazing experience in my life. I also want to thank the first and
the next generation of students at IDII; it was great to share with you guys.
Very special thanks go to all my friends for being always there.

Contents

3

0. Abstract

3

0.1 Problem

3

0.2 What is it

15

1. Introduction

15

1.1. Physical Computing

16

1.2. Microcontrollers

22

2. Background

22

2.1. Learning computer programming

24

2.2. Learning and prototyping with electronics

29

2.3. Contributions from the industry

33

2.4. Contributions from Physical Computing classrooms

35

3. Concept development

36

3.1. First Experiment

41

3.2. Second Experiment

47

3.3. Third Experiment

49

4. Design and Implementation

49

4.1. Wiring Software

50

4.2. Wiring Hardware

56

4.3. Wiring Web Site

57

4.4. First users

61

4.5. Reactive tables (Powered by Wiring)

62

4.6. Prototyping aids

64

4.7 Class support material

67

5. Conclusions and Future Direction

69

6. References

74

Apendix A. Wiring I/O Board Circuit Schematics

75

Apendix B. Wiring I/O Board Layout

1. Introduction

This chapter gives an overview of related work; prototyping with electronics in
art and design schools in the field known as physical computing. It will introduce
the subject of physical computing in the educational context, then present different projects that address in some way the components involved in this activity, such as learning computer programming and basic electronics; and discuss
some interesting cases relevant for this investigation.

1.1. Physical Computing
What is physical or tangible computing? Many approaches to this term, and in
general to human computer interaction or tangible user interfaces, have been
and are under development right now. Still in its early stages physical computing emerges as a space or foundation for exploring the concepts, future and role
of computing in our physical environment. Several people and institutions have
been involved in this movement or so-called phenomenon, sharing a common
basis but differing in their goals, approaches and applications.
Different curriculums have been proposed at the core of different design and
art schools to establish physical computing as something that can be taught
and learned. Such programs empower art and design students with the abilities and skills necessary to respond to the challenge of increasingly pervasive
technology in our society. Physical computing is playing an important role in
the development of contemporary art and design as it relates to the contexts of
electronic media.

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

The Interactive Telecommunications Program (ITP) at New York University

Software tools are built upon layers of abstraction from assemblers to program-

(NYU), the Computer Related Design program at the Royal College of Art (RCA)

ming languages or graphical user interfaces, which were the result of decisions

in London, Parsons School of Design, Human Computer Interaction at Stanford

made by many programmers and electronic engineers. As a result it is unlikely

University, School of Visual Arts (SVA) and Washington University, among oth-

that appropriate tools for designers might come out from the technology indus-

ers, are very interesting sources on this subject. Each of the programs in these

try, but perhaps allowing designers to create or participate or shape their own

schools is quite different from each other, as is the kind on works produced and
the audiences. As a common basis, the courses introduce students to the basics
of electronics, circuit design, prototyping, sensing technologies, simple micro-

design tools.

1
40-Pins PIC Microcontroller
Microchip Inc.

From the point of view of a computer user with little or no skill in programming,

controllers, computer-controlled artifacts, actuators, networked projects, video

who wants to create interactive software [and products] the current technological

tracking and analysis technologies, technical aspects in installations, remote

development has created the following situation:

presence and hacking existing electronic devices and robotics, among others.
The simplifications and abstractions made by the tool designers make it practiTeaching and learning physical computing is not a small task. Appropriate

cally impossible to experiment with and implement many interactive solutions

teaching curriculums have to be developed to integrate activities like computer

that are technically possible.

programming, basic electronics, and support software and hardware tools with
the educational context. Since most of the students in these courses come from

The user’s image of the design-space concerning interaction is fragmented and

art, design and humanities-related disciplines, the classes should be targeted to

incomplete. It is shaped by the tools they have been using and by the solutions

people with no previous technical or engineering skills.

they have seen. Consequently, many solutions that are technically possible are
“unimaginable” to most interaction designers. (Svanæs 3)

1.2. Microcontrollers

Nowadays there is a wide range of popular, powerful, and relatively inexpensive
microcontrollers available on the market for commercial, educational, hobbyist

Microcontrollers are a kind of small computer device that addresses some of the

and entertainment markets However, the knowledge of hardware and program-

difficulties involved in prototyping with electronics by introducing the concept

ming required to put them into production is quite vast and difficult to grasp for

of programming into it. The same unit can behave in different ways, just by doing

audiences other than the targeted audiences of engineering, intermediate and

or modifying a software program to adapt it to a specific need or purpose. Com-

advanced users.

puter programming is completely independent from electronics or a programming language in particular. The programming languages available to program

Programming language, functionality, cost, ease of use, availability of free soft-

microcontrollers range from native versions of assemblers, C, and BASIC, but

ware and examples, and documentation are all factors that must be taken into

there are others that can be programmed in most popular programming lan-

consideration when choosing the right microcontroller.

guages like Java or Logo. All of these programming languages have their weaknesses and strengths when it comes to ease of use, functionality, development

The microcontroller’s functionality varies from basic logic control up to fully

environments and interfaces for development. In most cases they are attached

functioning computers with wireless Internet or network access, RF communica-

to the very specifics of a technology, making it difficult to learn the basics of

tion, Bluetooth, GPS capabilities, and more complex systems. Many companies

programming and electronics at the same time. For this reason, it is a daunt-

like Motorola, Microchip, Parallax, Texas Instruments, Rabbit Semiconductors,

ing for a designer or artist to know where to turn when building a prototype or

ATMEL, UBICOM, Dallas Semiconductors etc. have a vast selection of program-

developing an idea.

mable devices, and in some cases a single company offers hundreds of families
of microcontrollers.

16

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

digital I/O pin 0

There are audiences from diverse disciplines that are potentially interested in design, prototyping and programming in the context of
electronic media, and would like a way that facilitates and encourages their process and allows them to test and come up with new
ideas and possibilities. However, these audiences may not have the
needed programming, electronics and math skills. A system oriented
towards these audiences is needed, to allow programming and prototyping with electronics. Such a system needs to facilitate learning
concepts that can be mapped and useful in different contexts.

digitalWrite(0,HIGH)
5-volt (HIGH signal)

2
AVR atmega128 microcontrolelr
Atmel Corp.
digital I/O pin 0

Explained in a very simple way, a microcontroller is an electronic device with a

digitalWrite(0, LOW)

set of Input and Output pins. Physically these pins may look like real pins, or can

0-volt (LOW signal)

be just connectors of some kind that other devices can be plugged to, depending
on the microcontroller; there are some that are single units and others that are a
3

complete electronic board with access to the pins through connectors.

80-Pin PIC Microcontroller
Microchip Inc.

5
Setting the value of a digital output pin

Depending on the microcontroller’s functionality, the pins can be inputs or outputs, so they can be used to receive and send signals. The signals can be discrete,

Signals can also be of analog nature. Many physical phenomena manifest in this

in the case of digital binary signals where the possible values are logical 0 (LOW)

way, like measuring light intensity, temperature, sound or position, where there

or logical 1 (HIGH). These values (HIGH or LOW) are reflected in changes in volt-

is a range of intermediate values that can be measured. In this case a pin in a

age, let’s say LOW is 0 volts, and HIGH are 5 volts.

microcontroller can be used as what is called an analog input or an analog-todigital converter (ADC). In an ADC a range of analog values is converted to a
range of numbers, depending on the precision of the ADC, for instance an 8-bit

digital I/O pin 0

precision ADC can differentiate between 256 possible values because that’s the
maximum decimal number that can be represented with 8 bits; others use 10-bit
precision for conversion, which can generate values between 0 and 1024. When

digitalRead(0)

an analog pin reads 0 volts it returns a 0 and when it reads 5 volts, returns the

5-volt (HIGH signal)

value 1024, with possibility of all the values in between the range: 2.5 volts re-

HIGH

turns 512 and so on.
Microcontrollers also have analog outputs that work in a way very similar to

digital I/O pin 0

the analog inputs, but technically different. Usually the analog output is done
through a process called Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) that consists of generating a pulse train in a normal digital output. This is equivalent to turning the pin

digitalRead(0)

ON and OFF very quickly, as it is done in dimmers for lamps or motor speed con-

0-volt (LOW signal)

trollers so the lamp or motor is not ON all the time but only part of it, reducing its
LOW

actual performance time. Real analog outputs can also be found; they are known
4

as a Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC), again depending on the precision with
which they can convert a digital number into a voltage value on a physical pin.

Reading the value of a digital input pin.

18

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0
0

portWrite(0,255)

1
1

portRead(0)

0
1

portRead(0)

port 0

0

1

port 0

1

0

port 0

port 0

portWrite(0,0)

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

3

from the host computer, since the program is downloaded to the microcontroller;

0

0

1

done using the serial port. At this point the microcontroller can be disconnected

0

0

15

so a physical connection between the microcontroller and the host computer is

it will stay in the microcontroller memory and will be executed constantly. Every

1

time the microcontroller is turned on, it will execute this program.
Microcontrollers, at least the kind of microcontrollers mentioned in this investigation can be re-programmed as needed.

6
Port reading and writing
User's
Program

Some microcontrollers provide access to individual pins or to groups of pins at

Linker

Compiler

Binary
file

Downloader

System
libraries

the same time. Groups of pins are known as Ports. For example, an 8-bit port is a
set of 8 pins. The microcontroller provides functionality to write a value to a port,
and will set the values of the individual pins accordingly. This is useful to control

PC Programming Environment

special kinds of devices or write data in parallel.
Microcontrollers also have timing abilities, usually a few timers that can be
used in different ways to measure time lapses, trigger events, synchronize func-

7
Microcontroller’s programming process

tions, etc.
Microcontrollers have communication capabilities, usually with serial ports, the
same kind of serial ports that are available in most computers. In this way they
can connect and communicate with other devices using the well-known serial
protocols. In many cases the serial ports are used for both programming the microcontroller and for communication purposes.
In general, programming a microcontroller is a process with two components.
One happens in a PC or host computer, and the other in the microcontroller itself. On the PC there is what is called a programming development environment,
which generally includes an editor for the user to type its programs, and include
the functionality to compile and generate the necessary files that are understandable by the microcontroller. When the user code is compiled, it is converted
to machine language, a language that is understandable by the microcontroller
and written to what is known as object binary file. This binary file can be downloaded to the microcontroller and then executed by it. To download the file to
the microcontroller, a special setup is needed, usually done through a serial port,

20

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Microcontroller

2. Background

DBN is not a general purpose programming language like C or Java, but was designed to familiarize people with the basic concepts of computational media.
Sponsored by private institutions, Alan Kay and some colleagues developed
Squeak. It is a program designed for children to express ideas about math and
8

science, and to enhance children’s learning in these areas. Users can build com-

10

Microworlds Logo

Squeak.

Microworlds, 2004

putational systems with it.
Boxer is under development at UC Berkeley by Andrea A. diSessa and Edward
H. Lay and some parts are copyrighted by MIT. It is a computational medium
based on a literacy model, including text and hypertext processing, dynamic and
interactive graphics, video, personal data management, (including e-mail and
networking) and programming.

9
DBN

Academic and private companies have created several software and hardware

MIT Media Lab, 1999

11
Turing, Interactive visual representation of Alan Turing’s machine.

systems for education, to provide a solution for teaching and learning computer

Jared Schiffman, 2000

programming and prototyping with electronics. I will present a brief description
of some of these projects.

The Visual Machine Model created in the MIT Media Laboratory at the Aesthetics
and Computation Group by Jared Shiffman, emphasizes the need for clear visual
representations of both machines and materials, and the importance of continuity. It presents a new paradigm for the design of visual programming languages,
with the goal of making computation visible and, in turn, more accessible. Five
dynamic visual programming languages were designed and implemented ac-

2.1. Learning computer programming

cording to the specification of the Visual Machine Model. (Shiffman, 1999)

Logo was developed by a team from MIT, and was originally designed to intro-

Processing, created by Ben Fry and Casey Reas of the Aesthetics + Computation

duce children to programming concepts, to develop better thinking skills that

Group at the MIT Media Laboratory and Interaction Design Institute Ivrea is a

could be transferred to other contexts. Logo was supposed to be a language for
the teaching of mathematical ideas to children through computer programming.
It was intended to be easy to learn, easy to use, easy to read, but also powerful

learning program and environment for creating systems in a subset of the JAVA

12
Processing

programming language, with real time three-dimensional graphics, color, input/

Ben Fry, Casey Reas 2004

output and other features that DBN lacked.

and able to cope with complex problems. It was then discovered that Logo extended far beyond mathematical areas. The man who became the spokesperson

The spirit of Processing is to act as an electronic sketchbook where people can

for this language was Seymour Papert.

learn the fundamentals of computer programming within the context of the
electronic arts (Reas, 2003).

Focusing on the aesthetic qualities of computation and computational media
design, Professor John Maeda and students in the Aesthetics + Computation

Both Design By Numbers, and Processing are systems that introduce the basic

Group at the MIT Media Laboratory created Design by Numbers (DBN), which is

ideas of computer programming within the context of visual design. Form ele-

both a programming environment and a language. The environment provides a

ments are drawn using computational concepts like iteration, repetition, vari-

unified space for writing and running programs and the language introduces the

ables, and conditional statements, as well as structural elements like functions

basic ideas of computer programming within the context of drawing. Visual ele-

and classes. They are powerful educational tools designed for adults, allowing

ments such as dot, line, and field are combined with the computational ideas of

users to create programs that manifest mainly on the computer screen. With Pro-

variables and conditional statements to generate images. (Maeda, 1999)

cessing, users can create beautiful graphics that are interactive and dynamic.

22

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

A number of workshops have been taught using Processing, refining methodolo-

Professor Martin also designed the Handyboard, which was more powerful than

gies and teaching curriculums, making the concepts of visuals and interaction to

the Mini Board but less complex than the 6.270 board, making it a more useful

emerge in the process of learning computer programming. WorkWorkshops also

overall package. It was designed from readily available components, fitting in a

facilitated the project’s communication, impact and further development.

commercial plastic enclosure and running from a single rechargeable battery,
13

it also uses fewer components. The Handy Board was the first microcontroller I

The Miniboard

ever used for my own art projects. Within the expansion board it is a powerful

Fred Martin, 1990

2.2. Learning and prototyping with electronics

computer, and it is based on the Motorola 68HC11 microcontroller.

In the projects described above, the users learn the basics of computer program-

In order to program it, there are free assembler compilers available as well as

ming by creating applications that manifest on the screen, but can not extend

commercial C compilers.

these concepts into the physical world, which is necessary to explore physical
interaction design and tangible media aspect. Most of the systems used in teach-

This kit is compatible with the Interactive C, which is a programming environ-

ing and learning physical computing were never intended for education. They

ment created for the MIT LEGO Robot Design project. It is a multitasking C lan-

originated from the electronics and radio hobbyists, the robot design field and

guage compiler originally created for students.

15

robotics applications. These introduced the concept of “Kits”, semi-complete sets

6.270 Class

14

that include basic electronic components as a common basis for beginners to

6.270 Board

start their explorations.

Fred Martin, 1989

MIT

The Handyboard is a very interesting case, because it was designed with the
robot design in mind. It was intended for engineering students and an audience
with a programming and technical background, and was one of the milestones

To build and design robots, Professor Fred G. Martin at the MIT Media Laboratory,

in robotics and hobbyists activities. There was also a step in the direction of

designed several systems.

providing both a hardware and software integrated solution for its audience. Another important aspect is that it was distributed to a wider audience than that of

The Mini Board designed at MIT Media Laboratory by the Professor Martin and
his colleagues was a single board computer optimized for controlling small DC

research labs. It was built, marketed and distributed by different parties, with all
the necessary documentation to build it freely available and released to public.

16

motors and receiving data from various sensors, initially intended for control-

The Handyboard

The companion software was also distributed freely and downloadable from the

ling small mobile robots. It communicates with a desktop computer over a se-

Fred Martin. 1999

web, even if the user didn’t purchase the board from the distributor. The software

rial port, making it suitable for desktop computer-based control as well. It was

provided support for Windows and Macintosh systems.

designed in 1990, and since then several copies of the board were printed out
and distributed.

At the hardware level it provided direct connections to motors, servos, sensors; it
was designed to be a plug-in platform. The downside was in the cost since it was

In 1989 Professor Martin designed the 6.270 Board which was very complex

a relatively expensive device.

board compared to the Mini Board. The project became a class called 6.270: The
MIT LEGO Robot Design Competition, intended for students to create fully au-

The Interactive C programming language is a subset of the C programming lan-

tonomous robots. This class is today a student-run activity where past students

guage, with a simplified syntax and multitasking capabilities. The system pro-

become future organizers.

vided libraries that made certain common activities like the use of motors and
servos very simple, but complex elements remained in the language, making it

Students received a Kit containing LEGO parts, electronics, sensors, batteries,

difficult to be used as the first programming language for non-engineer user to

motors and wire; they had a month to design, build and debug an autonomous

learn. Because it also inherited many low level commands and technical ele-

contest robot.

ments from the C language, it was very difficult for non-technical audiences
to grasp, but very interesting for those who already knew how to program or

24

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

already knew C ,and didn’t want to go into the intricacies of low-level languages

sensors and actuators are marketed with this system, that interfaces with the

like assembler.

regular LEGO brick and the Programmable bricks, but which make it difficult or
impossible to connect electronic devices that are not part of the set.

The C programming language is the most widely used programming language
since it was devised in the 70s. After some years of development it was standard-

LogoBlocks is the graphic programming environment that lets the user create

ized by the ANSI X3J11 committee. In the beginning it was associated with the

iconic programs to control a Programmable Brick. To create programs, you just

UNIX operating system, but later it expanded to all available systems becoming
the most spread programming language ever. Its abstractions lie in a sufficiently
high level that, with little effort, portability between machines can be achieved.
On the other hand the relationship between arrays and pointers, the way declara-

drag blocks from a palette and snap them together on a canvas.

20
The Handycricket

17

Fred Martin, 2003

MIT Programmable Brick
LLK MIT Media Lab

The GoGo Board is a simple I/O interface developed at the Future of Learning
Group at the MIT Media Lab by Arnan (Roger) Sipitakiat. It is used in projects that

tion syntax mimics expression syntax, memory management and in general some

need a simple interface between the computer and sensors, very useful for proj-

syntax particularities often serve as a stumbling block for beginners. Its success

ects that need to control simple actuators. It uses Microworlds Logo program-

lies in its portability, it remains as a simple and small language. It was created as

ming language and it works only when it is connected to the computer.

a tool to make useful programs that do useful things, covering the needs of many
programmers without trying to supply too much things. It displaced languages

The programmable bricks, Crickets Logo Board and GoGo board share are all tar-

21

like assembler while maintaining an abstraction level of machines and fluent
enough to describe algorithms and interactions in a wide range of environments.

The GoGo Board

geted to children’s education. They are toys that include mechanical parts, and

Arnan (Roger) Sipitakiat, 2002

the development environments are based in the concept of visual programming

(D. Ritchie 1993)

with the Logo programming language. They are very limited systems for activities involved in physical computing, but lack the flexibility required for general

People at the Lifelong Kindergarten Group (LLK) at the MIT Media Laboratory are

purpose applications.

working on the development of educational tools for learning concepts about
hardware and computation. Over the past decade, LLK worked on the develop-

Nylon is a system created at the Aesthetics + Computation Group at the MIT Me-

18
LEGO RCX Programmable Brick

ment of Programmable Bricks.

dia Lab by Megan Galbraith, Justin Manor and Simon Greenwold. It is a program-

LEGO Mindstorms, 2002

ming environment and language called Nylon that lets users write the control-

22
Nylon

The Programmable Brick is a tiny portable computer embedded into a LEGO

MIT Media Lab, 2002

brick for kids to build into their LEGO systems. Kids can create robots or standalone projects, not only structures and mechanisms, but also behaviors. The aim

MIT Media Lab, 2002

computation to their physical environment. Programmable Bricks have expanded into two areas. On the commercial side, they evolved into something called

variety of educational settings (Galbraith, 2003).
The Nylon system is based on the Netmedia’s BasicX microcontroller; the pro-

19

the RCX Brick that became the foundation for LEGO Mindstorms, a commercially
ing LEGO blocks.

Nylon builds off Design by Numbers (DBN), in that it was designed for artists and
visual designers. Nylon and LogoBlocks are each very powerful and are used in a

22. Nylon

is to teach kids concepts about engineering design and technology by bringing

available set of toys that lets users build robots and computational projects us-

ling code for programmable devices in addition to developing dynamic graphics.

gramming environment uses the Nylon language.

LEGO Rotational sensor
LEGO Mindstorms, 2000

23

The Nylon system has an interesting design in terms of its form. It comes covNylon (inside)

ered on one side with a board made of nylon (which gives it its name). On one

The programmable evolve into Crickets, which are tiny computers powered by

side the name is embedded in plastic on the board; on the other side it is covered

batteries that can communicate with each other by infrared light. Each can oper-

by a breadboard where people can quickly prototype things just by adding and

ate two motors and receive information from two sensors. They are programmed

connecting wires from the microcontroller terminal connectors to the bread-

in a dialect of the LOGO language. An evolution of crickets is available com-

board. No internal components are in contact with the exterior, but it can be

mercially as the Handy Cricket made by Fred Martin and his colleagues. A set of

taken apart as needed. Because of the design, it can easily be embedded into

26

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

different things, like clothes, pockets etc. making it an interesting option for dif-

pose and provides access to all the microcontroller’s ports with headers. It allows

ferent prototyping situations. It also has a battery connector inside, so a 9-volt

one to rapidly prototype and test new applications for the AVR microcontroller.

battery can be plugged inside the package with no extra or bulky space needed.

It is a very affordable and simple system, generic enough to be used for different

The model is very interesting as it is a clear attempt to make a self-contained

purposes and start up testing of prototypes. Pascal developed a series of librar-

unit for both programming and prototyping with electronics, which comes close

ies in C that simplify common use tasks. It is a very interesting system and it is

to being true desirable environment for a school. The programming environment
offered support exclusively for the windows operating system. Internally the
Nylon language was translated into Netmedia’s flavor of the BASIC language

24

completely based on GNU tools for its programming. Because the programming

26

Hotpants
Simon Greenwold, 2002

Programma2003

language is C it requires a good understanding of C and UNIX to use the avail-

Massimo Banzi, 2003

able tools. This has been widely used in the Human Computer Interaction Design

and then downloaded to the device using the proprietary BasicX programming

program at Stanford University by Professor Bill Verplank.

tools which are only available for the Windows operating system. This limited
the possibilities for expansion for the Nylon language and the system itself, as

Programma2003 is a prototyping board created by Massimo Banzi at Interaction

well as the possibilities for further distribution. Because it was mostly targeted

Design Institute Ivrea; currently it is used to build simple interactive artifacts

to create graphic applications within the Hotpants device, the Nylon program-

and as a teaching tool for the Physical Interaction Design classes at the Interac25

ming language included commands for drawing basic form elements like lines,
AvrMini

dots, circles, etc.

Pascal Stang, 2002

tion Design Institute Ivrea. It uses the Open Source JAL programming language
and the popular PIC16F876 Microchip microcontroller. At the moment the JAL

27
Parallax BasicStamp

The Hotpants device created in the Aesthetics + Computation Group at the MIT

Parallax Inc, 2000.

language is very limited and it is oriented to engineering audiences. The support
is limited as well; since the only source of information is its own creator, making

Media Lab by Simon Greenwold, is a 10 X 14 LED array display device for the

it difficult and cryptic to be used as a teaching language and to illustrate the con-

Nylon system . It renders graphic commands sent to it by the Nylon base unit.

cepts of programming to audiences with no previous experience in hardware or

Hotpants is powered by a PIC microcontroller, making it capable of considerable

programming. It is an attempt to offer a free platform, based on freely available

onboard processing. All necessary information to build Hotpants is available for

tools for the Windows, Mac and Linux operating systems.

public use from its web site. The necessary tools to build it are freely available
as well. It can be used independently from the Nylon system, making it possible
to connect to other devices by implementing the necessary commands. While

2.3. Contributions from the industry

the Hotpants display was available to the public, the Nylon board was not. It was
only used at the MIT Media Lab in diverse workshops and classes.

There are companies that have targeted their products to intermediate and beginner level users, and have invested time and effort in developing educational

Zuf is a programming system created at the Aesthetics + Computation Group at

material as well as support and community. I will describe some systems with

the MIT Media Lab by Megan Galbraith for controlling small embedded devices

this orientation.

and microcontrollers using fuzzy logic. It was designed and targeted for fashion
designers interested in building computational garments. It is a web-based de-

Multiple factors are involved in choosing the right platform for an application

velopment environment, and visual programming oriented. At the moment it is

that is general enough to respond to the necessities in diverse kinds of projects.

not completely developed or available to the public, but it is a very interesting

Price, power, memory, ease of use, freely available tools, support, programming

concept that tries to provide a complete tool for fashion design audiences in both

languages, and which operating systems are supported are all very important to

hardware and software terms and take advantage of the web as a programming

the choice.

environment to make it platform independent and widely available.
Parallax BasicStamp is a very popular microcontroller. There is a vast source of
AvrMini is an application/development board designed by Pascal Stang at Santa

information, code, examples, experiments, support, user groups and material

Clara University that is used for class exercises and workshops. It is general-pur-

available. It is sold as part of basic kits for beginners and education or as a stand-

28

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

alone product for experienced users as well. The kits include a board, microcon-

and a variety of programming languages. There is a free C (GCC) compiler for

troller, sensors, motors, and complementary electronic devices and companion

these systems, as well as commercial tools to program them. Both are available

book to develop experiments.

as standalone components, but also embedded in many different kits offered
by different companies. Both are targeted to intermediate and advanced users

Netmedia BasicX is NetMedia’s family of rapid development micro-controllers.
These products include the BasicX-01 Developer Station and chip, and the BasicX-24 Developer Station and microcontroller chip programmed in NetMedia’s

28

who have a good knowledge of hardware and programming, so they have been

29

Netmedia BasicX-24

Systronix JStamp

widely used in engineering schools, but are not very popular in art and design

Netmedia, 2001

Systronix, 2002

educational environments.

version of the BASIC Language. Around it, the company developed a set of devices
like LCDs and servo motor controller boards and there is also a vast number of re-

Systronix Javastamp is a microcontroller based on the Ajile family of microcon-

sources available on-line, as well as user groups, examples and documentation.

trollers. These are programmed in the Java language, and recently have started
to be used in engineering schools. There is a variety of kits available around this

Both BasicStamps and BasicX include an integrated development environment

product: TStik, JStik, JCX, JStamp, JSimm, JDroid, and JRealTime, depending in

(IDE) only available on the Windows operating system. These systems are very

the user’s needs and budget, but in general they are expensive devices, and dif-

expensive and fragile for educational purposes, but the availability of materials

ficult to use for beginners or non-technical users, due to the intricacies of Java

30

and support online make of them an excellent choice for beginners and hobby-

Dallas TINI

ists, and the classrooms of some schools. The programming environment is not

Dallas Semiconductors, 2001

programming and the offered set of instructions.

freely available, as users have to purchase it (included) with the hardware. Both

An integrated programming development environment is provided with the Kits

BasicStamps and BasicX are programmed in variations of the BASIC program-

and Java programs can be compiled with any Java compiler but the linking and

ming language which nowadays is far from being a widely used language and

download into the chip can only be made through using the proprietary Inte-

lacks the structure, elegance and level of abstraction of languages like C or JAVA.

grated Development Environment (IDE) software which is not freely available or

This makes it difficult to be used in other environments and to create reusable

distributable and is included with the purchased device.

or portable software. It is clearly not the right option for teaching and learning
the concepts of programming.

Dallas Semiconductors TINI is a system that provides the possibility to design
hardware devices able to connect to networks or the internet. It is mostly de-

Microchip PICs are a very popular family of microcontrollers. Hundreds of mod-

signed to use 1-wire interface products (sensors and actuators), making it dif-

els are available for different needs, as well as on-line support materials, examples, and documentation. They can be programmed in a variety of languages,
from assembler, C and BASIC, as well as open source languages like JAL. The low

ficult to use with the simple, cheap and widely available ones. There is an evalu31
Parallax Javelin Stamp
Parallax Inc., 2003

ation board available for testing and development and it is programmed in the
Java language. Users can use standard SUN Java development tools or the ones

price makes them a very interesting option for prototypes, but unlike the BasicX

of their choice. This system is pretty much a computer, with web server, serial

or BasicStamps which are products almost ready to use, they need some special

port, Ethernet port and an operating system. It is a very interesting option for

initial setup for both hardware and software. They require hardware initializa-

networked and advanced projects, but despite the price, additional circuitry is

tion programmers, which are hardware blocks designed to download programs

necessary in order to interface it with regular components, so is not the best

to the device to start it operating. This needs a deep understanding of technical

option if used in simple applications or in a classroom by beginners or non-tech-

concepts and processes. This family of microcontrollers became very popular

nical users. Once it is installed, it can be programmed from different platforms

due to amateur radio and hacking communities, as they were widely used and

through the network interface.

spread in the hacking of satellite signals.
Parallax Javelin Stamp is the same size package and electric configuration as the
Atmel AVR and ARM microcontrollers are both very inexpensive and powerful,

BasicStamp. It is programmed in the Java programming language and it is based

but both have a large source of on-line resources, examples and documentation;

in the Ubicom microcontrollers. Online community and support are also avail-

30

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

2.4. Contributions from Physical
Computing classrooms

able and a simpler programming and wiring model than the Dallas TINI microcontroller makes it better for beginners, but it is difficult for them when it comes
to the programming. It is possible to use different Java compilers to compile the
Java code but as the Systronix JStamp it is necessary to use the proprietary IDE

Finally I will mention the contributions of individuals and schools to the physical

to link and download the compiled program into the chip. Kits are available for

computing and electronics prototyping community. Many people have amazing

this microcontroller for beginners, but it is also possible to get it as a single unit.

web sites full of information, sample code, diagrams, documented experiences,
32

There are no free software tools for this platform.

Makingthings Teleo

recommendations and step-by-step guides. I will reference some of these people
and their web sites, as they are relevant for this research.

Makingthings, 2003

Makingthing’s Teleo is a modular set of components for building things with
electronics. It is a system designed to connect modules that add functionality to

Durrel Bishop’s work at the Royal College of Art and IDEO, ideas and methodolo-

the projects through a 4-wire interface peer-to-peer network. It can be interfaced

gies, have been extremely influential in the development of physical or tangible

to the Max/MSP software, as they provide objects to add its functionality to the

computing. He is very interested in designing electronic objects that are self-de-

MAX software. The modules are based on the PIC 18 family of microcontrollers;

scriptive of their behavior and how to augment non-electronic objects by giving

it provides MOSFET switches, which are devices able to switch larger currents

them new properties.

and voltages than the microcontroller can by itself. It is designed to span mechanical hardware and multiple applications. The system is very expensive for
teaching purposes, and also the MAX software must be purchased to program it

33
Infusion I-CubeX

Dag Svanaes has done research on the nature of interaction as well as in designing teaching curriculums and tools for teaching interaction designers with

Infusion Systems, 2001

in a graphical way. The Teleo system uses a very interesting model of modular

analysis from very different perspectives; his work has been very influential in

architecture so modules can be added and interconnected as necessary.

the interaction design community. He designed software tools for designers to
prototype graphical user interfaces by drawing with pixels with inherent behav-

The Infusion I-CubeX Digitizer is a device that translates information into MIDI.

ior: Interactive Pixels.

People can map the MIDI messages of their choice, controlling their own parameters. It is possible to connect up to 32 controllers. A turn knob can replace the

The Interactive Telecommunications Program (ITP) at New York University

mouse, a light can act as a mod wheel, a touch triggers samples, the temperature

(NYU) has been extremely influential in physical computing. It started with Dan

controls the volume, etc. It is a black box with inputs and outputs that can connect to MAX/MSP software. It is a very expensive device, and around it, Infusion
sells a wide range of very expensive sensors and actuators ready to connect to

34
Pond PIC Ultraflash Board
Pond Electronics, 2003

O’Sullivan’s Physical Computing class, and has been involved other people as it
have been growing in the last few years. Dan’s home page, as well as Tom Igoe’s
on Physical Computing (A Hands-on How-to Guide for Artists), are well known

the box. The price makes it very difficult to deploy in a school, and it is more ori-

resources on the internet. The amount of available material and references in

ented to professionals who are interested in MIDI interfacing for performances,

their web site is quite considerable. The information available covers a vast range

with no need of complex electronics knowledge.

of topics, like doing basic electronics, programming, serial communication, video
, MIDI, hacks, tutorials, guides for interfacing commercial and free software and

Pond Electronics designed a board based on the PIC16F876, as well as on the

hardware and software libraries made by them and their contributors to pro-

BasicStamp microcontrollers. They also designed a series of interface boards

vide connection between different technologies and solutions. All this targeted

for these systems, providing a standard PCB format and a stackable I/O bus in-

to support artists taking the physical computing class. Bill Verplank at Stanford

terface, which is very interesting for expanding hardware systems on demand.

University has been also very influential in the field with his individual work
and research as well with the Human Computer Interaction class. He taught the
Physical Interaction Design class at Interaction Design Institute Ivrea in collaboration with Massimo Banzi, who also leads physical computing workshops for
students in schools in Italy.

32

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

SenseLab at UCLA, the Electronics Laboratory for the UCLA Design | Media Arts

Knowledge is universal, Free Software too. In Education, means are more limited

Department, is an active source of resources for learning to prototype with elec-

than in other sectors, because they have to be employed on a large scale. It’s more

tronics, and knowledge dissemination and sharing.

relevant to pay grey matter (e.g. help for projects conception, personal and educational training) or extra devices than to pay proprietary licenses. (Free Software

Most teachers have chosen a commercial platform, commonly BasicStamp and

Foundation 2003)

BasicX microcontrollers. This decision was driven by convenience, availability of
materials, support, easy of use and basic features, rather than appropriateness
to a particular teaching programming or concepts in basic electronics.
It is well-known from the experience in the physical computing classes that students, especially those coming from non technological disciplines, become attached to the platform they learn from and continue using it. Because these
students don’t have technical or programming backgrounds, they invest time
and effort in learning how to use and program these devices; commercial products that are not meant to teach or illustrate the concepts behind programming
or electronics. The structure and tools provided are attached to specifics of a
technology, making it very difficult for students migrate to others, when the one
at hand is not the most appropriate solution for their explorations. If these audiences are willing to invest resources in learning such things, it makes sense for
them to learn concepts that can be used and mapped in different environments
and technologies, rather than learning the specifics and intricacies of a product.
Another important consideration for schools and students is the availability of
these tools for public use and distribution, at least in academic environments
and applications.
When appropriate, it is necessary to give students real computing skills, not only
proprietary software “directions for use.” Consequently, they should get unrestricted access to the source code, modify or adapt it to their own needs, and thus
improve the applications they use or develop.
Free Software is particularly performing and secure for communication, a priority
at school for Internet access and E-mail. Free Software allows remote servicing,
a necessity for its deployment in large schools. Free Software allows software
perennity as there is no necessity to buy the last software releases to obtain an
(eventual) improvement. Updates can be immediately developed (so users don’t
depend on editor goodwill) and shared with other users worldwide.

34

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

3. Concept development

tend this experience to hardware programming and prototyping with electronics? I started to explore a number of technological alternatives trying to find the
most appropriate ones.
To start the explorations, I conducted a series of experiments with different technologies guided by intuition, excitement and a hands-on approach. At the same
time, looking into the kind of applications where microcontrollers are used, I
tried to identify the basic features of a desirable system. After long discussions
and thoughts I decided to call my system Wiring. The following are my experiments with different technologies that led to it.

I had the opportunity to collaborate with Ben Fry and Casey Reas as part of the

3.1. First Experiment

Processing development team. I also use Processing on my personal activities
and as a teaching platform for teaching an Introduction to design for electronic

Based on my own experience and other’s works I started to think of what could

media at the University of Los Andes in Bogotá, and have also taught diverse

be the basic desirable Application Programming Interface (API), which is the set

Processing workshops in different parts of the world.

of commands or instructions available to users in a programming environment

Processing, as a subset on the Java language, brings to users an application inter-

to create their own programs.

face independent from the technology in which it is used, maintaining a level of

Processing compiles the user programs (code), which is a subset of the Java lan-

abstraction that allow users to learn the basics of computer programming and

guage, and produces an application. By pressing the play button, the resultant

focus on their projects rather than in technical issues or the technology speci-

application can be seen manifested on the screen, and it can respond to differ-

ficities of a platform. The Java programming language offers a syntax which is

ent input devices connected to the computer. Another possibility is to export

very similar to C, C++, Javascript or Flash Actionscript, making possible to build

the user’s program to an applet, which is an application that can run inside a

programs and algorithms that can be easily translated to different languages

web browser as part of a web page. Processing generates the necessary files to

and environments. This makes of Processing a very interesting tool for teaching

post the user’s program code and the application to the web, including the basic

and learning computer programming.

HTML document.

Large distinctions between Processing and Java are the Processing graphics li-

The idea was to generate an API as close as possible to Processing, at least in the

brary and a simplified programming style that doesn’t require users to under-

basic set of commands, maintaining the concepts and coherence used in Process-

stand more advanced concepts like classes, objects, or animation and double-

ing, to create a new set of commands to support Wiring. Because of this, the Wir-

buffering (while still making them accessible for advanced users). Such technical

ing language could be immediately used by the existing Processing community.

details must be specifically programmed in Java, but are integrated into ProcessAs my first experiment I naturally started to look at Java programmed devices, if

ing, making programs shorter and easier to read. (Reas, Fry, 2003)

there are not so many, I found some interesting devices to analyze.
With Processing there is a community of 5000+ artists, designers and programmers around the globe, as well a group of educators, using Processing in their

I concentrate in studying 2 cases: the Parallax JavelinStamp, and The Dallas

teaching curriculums in art and design schools. I found inspiring and of great

Semiconductor’s TINI Board. I contacted Dallas Semiconductors and Parallax

value to build on this work. A large number of workshops have been taught

Inc. explaining the purpose of my project, and ask for their possible collabora-

around the globe, allowing the development team to gain the experience that

tion. Dallas Semiconductors arranged shipping of a TINI microcontroller as well

permitted the refining of the teaching materials and curriculums, and collecting

as the socket board, with discount from the retail price. Parallax Inc. also offered

feedback on the API and environment for further development. How could I ex-

discount and assistance in getting one of their devices.

36

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

As a technology enthusiast I found the Dallas TINI board very interesting, its
capabilities to connect to the network are quite amazing. It is a very powerful
microcontroller, almost a small computer. Users can run a web server, and can
also connect to it from the network; it can also be connected to the computer’s
serial port. Once it is up and running, the users can modify their programs and
then they can be sent to the board via FTP.
The board is mostly designed to be interfaced with one-wire devices, which are
a set of sensors and actuators that operate with literally one-wire connection
and use a special protocol for that—but I found that connecting an LED and to
make it blink is quite difficult—and this usually is the first exercise for interaction design students.
The TINI microcontroller has a Java API very similar to the standard Java, with
additional instructions to support its functionality. It uses standard Java classes,
which are basically the Java compiled files and then these are linked into a binary file that can be uploaded into the board. Programmers can use the Java
compiler of their choice to compile their programs, but the linking is achieved
35

through the Dallas tools.

Parallax Javelin Stamp initial setup

It is very difficult to use as a platform for teaching physical interaction design.
The SIMM and the board are quite big and expensive even before the user’s circuitry is added for creating a prototype, but no doubt they are very interesting

vice and asked its manufacturers for support. They collaborated, and responded

hardware for advanced or very specific purposes.

to my inquiries by creating command line tools (separating some commands

I received the Parallax JaveStamp also known as Javelin Stamp. As a product
from Parallax, which already has a long experience in the educational and hob-

from the programming environment) to link and download the program to the
microcontroller.

byist market, it seems closer to the well known Basic Stamp. In fact, it is compat-

So after this experiment, I decided to take my chances and do the first attempt

ible in terms of pin functionality with the BasicStamp.

to integrate between the Processing environment, the created API and this mi-

I mounted the microcontroller in a board and started to do some programming
on it. The programming environment is available only for Windows, and it is not
free; users buy it and have the right to use it when they purchase the device.

crocontroller, which meant that, users should be able to write their programs
in the familiar Processing environment, using the instructions and commands
proposed for the Wiring language, then compile and download the code to the
microcontroller and, if lucky, see it working by some kind of blinking light.

Internally from the development environment it calls for the GNU IBM Jikes Java
compiler; it uses an old version of Jikes because of class files compatibility. I tried
to use newer versions of Jikes and the generated files don’t work with the Parallax linker.

A few weeks later finally some stable application resulted. It seemed to be working, and it was very exciting to see what this could be for users if they were able
to write code for their experiments in this way. So this encouraged me to continue further.

The class files are linked later with the libraries to produce a binary file that can
be downloaded into the microcontroller. The linker is the intellectual property of
Parallax, and it is not open source. Nonetheless I was very interested in this de-

38

I made no change to the processing interface for this experiment; only changes in the buttons’ functionality were made. The Play button was used to verify
(compile) the user code, and the Export button was used to compile, link and

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

download the program into the microcontroller. It also generated an HTML tem-

After this experience I continued examining other Java-based microcontrollers,

plate with the user code to be posted on the web that could be edited later to add

including devices that seemed to run native Java code. All of them at the very end

images, diagrams, etc.

use a linker and downloader that usually is property of the manufacturer, which
in all cases is only available for Windows and some with a licensing scheme that

After the initial Windows support from Parallax, I asked them for the possibility

could prevent the future distribution of this project.

of having the command line linker and downloader available for Mac and Linux.
(As I write this paper I still don’t have an answer from them.) This first experi-

For this experiment I built two examples, one a blinking light and the other a

ment was done without regard for future possibilities of distribution of their pro-

switch input, which are explained in detail in the second experiment, since they

prietary software but more driven by the excitement of doing it. Nonetheless I

were repeated using a revised version of the Wiring language.

have to thank them for their support. They would be interested to support this
kind of project in the near future, but as they are developing their own platforms,
their time frame was too slow for me to use their technology in my research.
Unlike programming the Parallax BasicStamp, the programming for the Javelin
Stamp is more difficult for beginners, regardless of whether it is worth pursuing
to learn to program in Java.
Conclusions after this experiment:
Java programming for the microcontroller is a very interesting option to build
upon. It has the possibility of easily extending the available command set by
programming in Java.

37
Parallax Javelin Stamp press button example

36
Functions assigned to buttons in the Processing interface

40

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

3.2. Second Experiment

experiment I changed some of the commands in the API to be coherent with
Processing style and making more sense for the user. After programming the

The next thing I did was to analyze the balancing of the microcontroller ca-

basic set of instructions, I made a set of examples using the Wiring language. In

pabilities and the availability of free tools. I analyzed some of the most widely

the mean time more evaluation boards arrived, among them Microchip PIC, AVR

used microcontrollers, and two families of chips seem promising, ARM-based

Atmega128 and samples from other devices.

microcontrollers and AVR microcontrollers. I choose to work on the ARM microcontroller for the next experiment. Many companies manufacture ARM based

Example 1: blinking LED

microcontrollers, among them Phillips and Atmel. Based on their response to my

This example simply shows how to make an LED (which is basically a light) to

requests for help, I started with the Atmel ARM version, specifically on the AT91

blink (turn on and off) every half a second. The LED is connected to pin number

R40008 microcontroller.

6 according to the diagram.

I got the evaluation board, which basically consists of an electronic board with

int ledPin = 6;

// LED connected to pin 6

the microcontroller soldered to it, switches, LEDs, serial ports and I/O pins ready
to be used, so that I could concentrate on the software development rather than

void setup()

in building an initial electronic circuit for testing.

{
// Nothing for setup

After building the necessary tools to compile programs for this platform, I start-

}

ed porting part of the Wiring commands (API) to the specifics of the ARM in the C

void loop()

and assembler languages, initially the most basic ones. From the previous

{
// Sets the LED on
pinWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
// Wait for half a second
delay(500);
// Sets the LED off
pinWrite(ledPin, LOW);
// Wait for half a second
delay(500);
}

38

39
Blink LED

Atmel ARM Evaluation board
Atmel Inc., 2003

42

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Example 2: LED swing
This example shows in a row of 8 LEDs how to make them light one at a time in a
sequence, giving the impression that the light moves from one to the next. When
it reaches the last one it comes back to the first one.
// which pin is currently used

40
Swing LEDs

int which = 0;
// User defined function to turn off all the LED

delay(200);

// connected from pin number 0 to pin number 7

// Move to the next one

void turn_all_off()

which = which + 1;

{

// If reached the last one go back to the first
int i;

if (which >= 8)

for(i=0; i<8; i++)

{

{

which = 0;
pinWrite(i, LOW);

}

}

}

Example 3: An LED blinks while the user presses a switch

}

This example shows how to read a switch which is the most basic input device. It
void setup()

blinks an LED while the user presses a switch. When the user releases the switch

{

it turns off the LED.
// Nothing for setup

}

int direction = 1;

// Used for the blinking

int switchPin = 12; // Pin atached to the switch
void loop()

int ledPin = 6;

// LED on pin 6

{
// Turn all LED off

void setup()

turn_all_off();

{

// Set on the actual LED

// Sets switch pin as input

pinWrite(which, HIGH);

pinMode(switchPin, INPUT);
}
void loop()
{
// If the switch is pressed blink the LED
if(pinRead(switchPin) == LOW)
{
direction *= -1;

44

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

// Alternate between on and off the LED
if (direction == 1)
pinWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
else
pinWrite(ledPin, LOW);
delay(200);
}
// If not pressed, turn off the LED
else
{
pinWrite(ledPin, LOW);
}
}

42

Example 4: Controlling a screen-based application running on a PC through

Controlling a screen-based application

touching an object.
This example shows how an object becomes a very simple interactive device to
control a screen-based application running in a remote PC. Basically the PC is

// Touch sensor will be attached to pin 23

running a graphic application, which receives input from the serial port. The PCs

int touchSensor = 23;

serial port is connected to the microcontroller’s serial port. The microcontroller
is waiting for user input and when the user presses the object, it sends a signal
through the serial port causing the PCs running application to react by changing
the shape and movement of basic graphic forms on the screen.

41
The LED blinks when the

void setup()
{
// Starts the serial port with default settings

switch is pressed

beginSerial(9600);

In order for the microcontroller to detect the event of touching, it has connected

// Sets touch sensor pin as input

a touch sensor to one of the pins. The touch sensor acts a simple switch, which

pinMode(touchSensor, INPUT);

is turned on when the user touches an electrode and off when the user releases

}

it, so the electrode is inside the interactive object.
void loop()
{
// If the user touches the object sends a ’1’
// and waits until he stops touching
if(pinRead(touchSensor) == HIGH)
{
serialWrite(’1’);
while(pinRead(touchSensor) == HIGH)
{

46

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

delay(500);
}
// When the user release the object send a ’0’
// through the serial port to the PC to indicate the object
// was released
serialWrite(’0’);

43
Atmel STK500 Evaluation board

}

44
DLP Design USB232M Evaluation board
DLP Design, 2003

}

ARM microcontrollers are very powerful devices. In some setups they require
additional peripheral electronics. For the next experiment, I scaled down the
microcontroller to the Atmel AVR microcontrollers family, all of which are still
powerful but less expensive.
45
BDMICRO MAVRIC-II atmega128 Evaluation Board
BDMICRO, 2003

3.3. Third Experiment
The third experiment consists again of porting and testing the existing Wiring

I proceeded to implement the analog to digital conversion, digital to analog (PWM

API to the AVR microcontroller, specifically to the atmega128. This microcon-

Pulse width modulation), pulse generation, as well as some basic libraries, like

troller has a very good balance in terms of power, features and price. I received

serial port communication, servo motor, the Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) library,

an evaluation board from BDMICRO. This board provides access to all the fea-

for generic text displays based on the HD44780 controller.

tures of the microcontroller without adding any extra complex devices.
I received an evaluation board for the FTDI USB chip in order to provide support
After some time the API was at the same level as the ARM version. After testing

for USB serial connection, since the serial port is a disappearing commodity in

the existing examples, they were made available from the wiring Web site along

the computer market today, especially on laptops. Wiring should support the se-

with the updated API.

rial port communication without having to use an external adaptor for it.

By porting the Wiring API to different microcontrollers, patterns started to

FTDI provide drivers for the Microsoft Windows, Mac OSX and Linux operating

emerge that will help to support the future development of Wiring for other

systems, which are necessary for the Wiring environment to run on this operat-

microcontrollers.

ing systems. The chip worked successfully after running some tests.

48

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

4. Design and Implementation

pow()
max()
min()
ceil()
floor()
constrain()

4.1. Wiring Software

Trigonometry
sin()
cos()
tan()
atan2()
radians()
degrees()

I designed an API, the basic set of commands that are available for users in their
Wiring programs developed for their projects and explorations. Many modifications have been made since the original language proposal; maintaining the

Random
random()

coherence with Processing and with the concepts that need to be illustrated. As
soon as adjustments are made I developed examples that use the new command
set. By doing such examples, it helps me to detect which makes sense in the actual set of commands, and quickly make revisions and changes if necessary. This

46

Constants
PI ( 3.14159... )
TWO_PI ( 6.28318... )
HALF_PI ( 1.57079... )

Servo Motor
Basic servo motor manipulation
library
LCD Display
Basic LCD manipulation library

Libraries

DC Motor
Basic DC motor manipulation
library.

Libraries extend the basic functionality of Wiring. It is possible to
write your own libraries.

Network (In progress)
Sending and receiving data over a
net of devices.

Serial
Supports communication between
Wiring and external hardware via
the serial port.

more to come...

Initial Wiring API

API is available from the Wiring programming environment.

Structure
; (semicolon)
= (assign)
() (parentheses)
, (comma)
// (comment)
/* */ (multiline comment)
void
setup()
loop()
{} (curly braces)
[] (array access)
. (dot)

Iteration
while()
for()
Conditionals
if()
else
Logical operators
|| (logical OR)
&& (logical AND)
! (logical NOT)

Input /Output
Environment
delay()

Data
Primitive
int
float
char
byte
boolean

Pin Digital I/O
pinMode()
digitalRead()
digitalWrite()
Port Digital I/O
portMode()
portRead()
portWrite()
Pin Analog Input
analogRead()

Control
Relational Operators
> (greater than)
< (less than)
>= (greater than or equal to)
<= (less than or equal to)
== (equality)
!= (inequality)

of the media and the available commands of the language. These examples are
available in the Wiring Examples sketchbook distributed with the application
and from the Wiring web site Examples section.

Timing
WTimer
mark()
timerEvent()

From now on all the API changes and Examples will be directly posted and made
available from the Wiring web site in the Reference section.

Pulse Generation
beginPulse()
endPulse()
pulseFrequency()
pulseRun()
pulseStop()
pulseRunning()
Pulse Input
pulseIn()

Users can create their programs in the Wiring environment editor. The user’s
programs are compiled and then could be downloaded to the Wiring electronics
I/O board.
Once the program is downloaded to the Wiring I/O Board, it is executed on it.

Text Output
printMode()
print()

4.2. Wiring Hardware

Math

Terminal Keyboard
keyPressed
key
keyPressed()
keyReleased()

Operators
+ (add)
- (subtract)
* (multiply)
/ (divide)
++ (increment)
-- (decrement)
% (modulo)
+= (add assign)
-= (subtract assign)
- (negation)

Time & Date
millis()
second()

abs()
sq()
sqrt()

PWM (Analog) Output
analogWrite()

A set of small prototypical examples is being developed to illustrate the basics

minute()
hour()
day()
month()
year()

I designed the Wiring electronics I/O board. This I/O board is based on the Atmel
AVR atmega128 microcontroller, which is a powerful, scalable and cost effective.
The board has available 48 I/O digital pins, 8 Analog Input pins and 6 Analog
Output (PWM) pins. It also has two hardware serial ports, Two-wire Interface protocol (TWI), In System Programmer (ISP) connector for initial board setup, and
JTAG connector available for specialized debuggers. Some pins have different
functionality and special functions which is made available through the Wiring

50

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

of a 500mA fuse in the Wiring board. The fuse will break and will have to be
replaced if a problem occurs, but will keep safe the Wiring I/O board and the
user’s computer.
More information regarding these matters will be available on the web site, as well
as connecting a wide range of sensors and actuators to the Wiring I/O board.
Several considerations were taken in the design of the board. Since it is a system
designed for learning and prototype interaction design projects, it provides access to all I/O pins. Basic sensors and actuators can be directly connected to the
49
Standard Servo Motors

board, but more complex elements like a motor will require an external driver
for connecting them to the board. What direct functionality to put on the board
was a concern for the design of the I/O board. It’s been observed that using kits
with specific plug-in connectors prevented people to try out other things. By
providing specific connectors some kits were limiting the user to what the makers thought they would want to do with them. In Wiring, abstractions have been
made in the API; an example of this is the servo motor library. A servo motor

47

is special kind of motor that can only move 180 degrees, so it can go back and

Wiring I/O Board

forth or stay in a specific position. In order to drive a servo motor it is necessary
to send a pulse of a specific length and frequency to the servo motor. Variations
programming environment. Access to the I/O pins is provided through headers.

of these parameters will cause the motor to position in a specific angle. This is a

Depending on the application, it is possible to use different kind of headers with

technological solution that is far from being understandable by users. It seems

the Wiring I/O board: male, female or screw. Headers can also be soldered in the
bottom side of the board for special purposes.

Servo Motor Library

The Wiring I/O board can be connected to a computer using any available USB

beginServo()
Starts the servo motor library.

port. This USB port is used for both downloading the compiled user programs

endServo()
Stops the servo motor library.

to the microcontroller, as well as for communicating the Wiring I/O board with

attachServo()
Creates and attaches a servo motor to an i/o pin.

other devices or computers.

position()
Gets the servo motor position.

The Wiring I/O board can be powered from the host computer’s USB port or from
a generic positive center Direct Current (DC) power supply adapter that provides
from 7 to 15-volt DC. While powered from the USB port, special care has to be

48
Wiring I/O Board headers:

angle()
Sets the servo motor position angle.

screw, male and female.

taken since the computer’s USB bus can only power small, low current consumption devices. It is fine for doing small experiments with LEDs, switches or some
sensors, but not to power devices like motors, servo motors, displays, etc. that
have much higher current consumption. If this is the case, an external power
adapter is needed to power the motors or devices attached to the board. Protection for both the Wiring I/O board and the host computer is provided by means

52

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

more natural to think of an angle and set the position of the servo motor by

pulses determine the value of the measured unit. For instance pulses determine

telling it the desired angle. This abstraction originated the set of commands to

speed and direction in the case of the rotary encoder, or X and Y acceleration

control a servo motor.

in the case of the accelerometer. Other sensors work based on communication
protocols (like TWI) can be grouped as well by communication protocol. In these

Sensors and actuators can be grouped in families depending on their basic func-

51

tioning or communication protocol. Many sensing technologies are based on the

cases it makes sense to provide commands to support the protocols rather than

55

Bend sensor

variation of resistance through a physical phenomenon, like light intensity, heat,

Accelerometer

the specific sensor when appropriate, and then provide examples that illustrate

Analog Devices Inc. 2003

the use of them. Nonetheless there are some cases in which a library will be a

stretch, press, humidity, movement, etc. All these sensors can be read by an ana-

better solution to make the language and the use on the sensor or actuator more

log input pin, and the value read will determine the position, temperature, light,

understandable for users. The use and the nature of the physical phenomenon

etc. in the appropriate case.

that needs to be measured or generated with a sensor or actuator will determine
this; but still users will learn the basics of electronics and connection of compo-

It is the same with binary sensors or devices where the only possible inputs and

nents, maybe not at the level of an electronic engineer, but enough to be able to

outputs are HIGH or LOW. In the case of switches or touch sensors ON (HIGH) and

use generic components as basic interconnection blocks to add functionality or

OFF (LOW) logic is used. There are sensors like encoders, accelerometers and dis-

52

tance rangers, which work by generating pulses. The length and frequency of the

complement their designs. This stimulates and encourages curiosity and leaves

56

Sharp Ultrasonic Ranger

space for the user’s imagination about how something can be connected and

Rotary Encoder

integrated in their works.

Digital Input/Outputs 24 - 39

Analog
Inputs
0-7

Analog
(PWM)
Outputs
0-5

Prototyping interaction design projects often require taking very different technologies and try to put them to work together. From simple standalone or networked interactive objects or devices to prototypes that involve computers or extra external equipment in complex interactive installations. Wiring is flexible and

Power supply
connector
7-15V

powerful enough to satisfy interaction design prototyping needs. The following
53

diagrams show some physical interaction design prototyping scenarios.

57
QPROX Touch Sensor

Microswitch

Quantum Research, 2003

Power supply
selector USB
or External
Interactive physical device / installation

54

Digital Input/Outputs 0 - 23

Slider potentiometer (variable resistor)

+5v

Wiring I/O Board

USB
connector

58
Tilt Switches

Sensors /
Actuators

+7-15v
GND

50

59
Prototyping standalone physical devices or installations

Wiring I/O Board Map

54

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Physical World

Communication systems
Network etc.

Software / screen-based
application

Interactive physical device or installation

Wiring I/O Board

PC

Input peripherals
keyboard, Mouse etc.

Sensors /
Actuators

4.3. Wiring Web Site
I designed a web site for Wiring. I started right after the first examples were

Physical World

working. First I designed a typeface exclusive for the project and its image. The
Wiring typeface includes 2 families, Normal and Dots; the later is used for the
Wiring logo in the web site and the electronics I/O board.

Output peripherals
Screen, sound system,
printer etc.

60

The Wiring and Processing web sites have differences and similarities. This avoids

Prototyping physical devices or installations including PCs and peripherals

confusing the user, and better suits the differences in the nature of the content
displayed, especially in the examples section of the web site.
Interactive physical device or installation

As in the Processing web site, the Cover section will directly display Happenings,

Interactive physical device or installation

Wiring I/O Board

Physical World

Sensors /
Actuators

Wiring I/O Board

an Exhibition and a few Examples direct links. Also the main navigation bar will
link to all sections of the web site.
Sensors /
Actuators

Physical World

Now that the Wiring I/O board has come to reality, new sections will be incorporated into the Web site’s architecture. These will include all the information
related to the I/O Board as well as to basic electronics, sensors and actuators

61
Prototyping interconnected physical devices or installations

connection, etc.

62
Snapshots of the Wiring web site

56

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Example 5: Light serial

// created 13 May 2004

Demonstrates how to read data from the serial port. If the data received is an

void setup()
{
size(200, 200);
beginSerial();
noStroke();
framerate(10);
}

‘H’ turns ON a light, if it is an ‘L’ turns OFF the light. The data comes from a
computer running a Processing program, it sends an ‘H’ if the mouse is over a
rectangle otherwise it sends an ‘L’.

// light serial
// by BARRAGAN <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/h.barragan>
char val;
port
int ledpin = 12;

// variable to receive data from the serial
// LED connected to pin 12

void setup()
{
pinMode(ledpin, OUTPUT);
beginSerial(9600);
}
void serialEvent()
{
val = serial;
}

boolean mouseOverRect()
{
return ((mouseX >= 50)&&(mouseX <= 150)&&(mouseY >= 50)&(mouseY
<= 150));
}
void loop()
{
background(#222222);
if(mouseOverRect())
{
fill(#BBBBB0);
serialWrite(‘H’);
pressed
} else {
fill(#666660);
serialWrite(‘L’);
}
rect(50, 50, 100, 100);
}

// pin 12 as OUTPUT
// initialize serial port

// get data received in val

void loop() {
if(val == ‘H’)
{
digitalWrite(ledpin, HIGH);
} else {
digitalWrite(ledpin, LOW);
}
delay(100);
}

// if receive an ‘H’
63

// turn ON the LED

Controlling a light from
a screen application

// if not turn it OFF

*/

// wait 100ms for next reading

/* Processing code
// mouseover serial
// by BARRAGAN <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/h.barragan>
// Demonstrates how to send data to the Wiring I/O board, in order
to
// turn ON a light if the mouse is over a rectangle and turn it
off
// if the mouse is not.

58

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

// change color
// send an ‘H’ to indicate mouse is

// change color
// otherwise send an ‘L’

Example 6: Switch serial

void serialEvent()
{
val = serial;
}

Demonstrates how to send data using the serial port. A computer running a
Processing program receives the data from the serial port and fills a rectangle
according to the value received.

void loop()
{
background(#222222);
if(val == 0)
fill(#666660);
else
fill(#CCCCC0);
rect(50, 50, 100, 100);
}

// switch serial
// by BARRAGAN <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/h.barragan>
int switchpin = 0;
void setup() {
pinMode(switchpin, INPUT);
beginSerial(9600);
}

*/

void loop() {
if(digitalRead(switchpin) == HIGH)
serialWrite(1);
else
serialWrite(0);
delay(100);
}

/* Processing code
64

// switch serial
// by BARRAGAN <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/h.barragan>

Controlling a screen application
through a switch

// Demonstrates how to read data from the Wiring I/O board, in order
// to fill a rectangle on the screen using a lighter color when a
switch connecter
// to the Wiring I/O board is pressed,
// and fill it with darker color when the switch is released.
// created 13 May 2004
int val;
void setup()
{
size(200, 200);
beginSerial();
noStroke();
}

60

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

// Controlling a servo position using a slider (variable resistor)
// by Michal Rinott <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/m.rinott>

4.4. First users

int myservo=0;
// servo channel 0 to attach a servo.
int servopin=0; // digital pin used to connect the servo
int sliderpin=0; // analog pin used to connect the slider
int sliderValue; // variable to read the value from the analog pin

I started testing the Wiring I/O board and programming environment with one
of my classmates, Michal Rinott. After doing some of the basic examples, she
developed an example on her own, controlling a servo motor position using a
slider variable resistor.

void setup()
{
beginServo();
// initializes the servo library
// attaches the servo number 0 to digital pin 0
attachServo(myservo, servopin);}

We employed the technique of “think aloud” in order for me to understand her
path and direction while doing the examples, to give me insights about the process she follows.

void loop()
{
// reads the value of the slider (value between 0 and 1024)
sliderValue = analogRead(sliderpin);
// scale it ot use it with the servo (value between 0 and 180)
sliderValue = sliderValue/5.68;
// sets the servo position according to the scaled value
angle(myservo, sliderValue);
delay(15);
// waits for the servo to get there
}

My experience with Wiring was short but pleasant. My previous experience with
coding for electronics was with the BasicX environment and looking over the
shoulders of people using the JAL environment. The Wiring environment was very
different: it felt simple, clean, aesthetic, non-technical, and not buggy. It seemed
to do what I wanted, without any technical monsters lurking behind the scenes
waiting for my mistakes.

65
Michal Rinott testing Wiring

Having used Processing before, I felt comfortable and familiar in the environment.
I was surprised at how intuitive the language was, and at how simple it was to
get things to work—single command lines made things light up! It all felt very direct I was helped a lot—given the exercises and the exact components I needed to
perform them. In this context, and with my prior knowledge, it was quite easy to
do things. I got a line of LED’s running back and forth - that was quite easy - and
then struggled a bit with the border condition: getting the last LED not to “blink”
when the sequence changed direction. It was beautiful to see the “for loop” kind of
behavior visualized before my eyes.
The best exercise was the slider + motor example. It was fun to control a spinning behavior with a sliding—linear motion. It got my imagination running... this
could scratch my back! and then more.
Peeking into a new language, it was interesting to think about the mental models created by the choice of command terms. The wording would change the way
people think about the underlying function. Should the motor be sent an “Angle”
command or a “Rotation” command? What would my expectations be in each one
of these cases as to what behavior a specific number would invoke? Exciting! (Ri-

66
Controlling a Servo motor position with a slider variable resistor
Michal Rinott, 2004

nott 2004)

62

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

She successfully finished the slider-servo example and it is posted on the Wiring
web site’s Examples section.
The next user was Karmen Franinovic. She proceeded to do exercises with the
existing Wiring examples, and then she started to prototype controlling a light’s
intensity with a stretch sensor. The stretch sensor is like a rubber band that
69

changes resistance when it is stretched. It worked successfully and again was

Controlling a light’s intensity with a stretch sensor

a experience that provided insights on different aspects. She tested some of the

Karmen Franinovic, 2004

math library functions as well.
Since I had some experience with processing it was easy for me to get into it. The
commands are simple and easy to understand. I would like to see more circuit ex-

67

// Stretch light

Karmen Franinovic doing experiments
with Wiring

// by Karmen Franinovic <http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/

amples and of course typical circuits for various sensors and actuators. The experi-

k.franinovic>

ments can be done very fast: in my example the only little problem encountered
was the scale transformation, but with the minimal knowledge of mathematics

// Created 15 May 2004

such problems can be easily solved.
int val;

I had used BasicX and Basic Stamps, especially on short projects or workshops.
I also used Teleo Makingthings which is easy, but limiting, the thing that I don’t

void setup()

like of it is that it has no brain! You always need to use the computer attached to

{

it. With Wiring I can write a program in a familiar environment, similar to pro-

// nothing for setup

cessing and download it into the processor. This gives me more possibilities, also

}

Wiring has more input/outputs available, so I can scale my project with no need to
add more modules. I cannot wait to have it outside! (Franinovic 2004)

68
Myriel Milicevic and Maya Lotan doing
experiments with Wiring

void loop()
{
val = analogRead(0);

// read analog input pin 0

val = (val - 400) * 0.637;

// scale value

val = constrain(val, 0, 255); // constrain value
analogWrite(0,val);

// write value to analaog output 0

delay(50);

// wait 50ms for next reading

}

64

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

4.5. Reactive tables (Powered by Wiring)
A set of “reactive tables” that respond to physical actions from the users. These
abstract pieces are the first explorations powered by Wiring. In each piece, the
interaction is mediated through the same physical object, the light cube, and the
response is created on the table surface, a combination of form and interaction.
Each light cube is identical except for the interaction principle it embodies. One
interaction principle per table: press and release, inclination and rotation of the
light cube. The tables respond accordingly by changing the graphic patterns on
their surface.

70
Reactive Tables
Photograph by Ivan Gasparini

Each table is controlled by a Wiring I/O board. Inside each table there is also a PC
computer. Each light cube (one per table) has a different sensor on it. The sensor
in the cube is connected to the Wiring board through the cable that connects the
cube with the table. This cable also powers the light cube.

71
Reactive Tables
Photograph by Ivan Gasparini

The Wiring system, checks for the sensor data and sends the appropriate data to
the PC computer through a USB cable. In the PC computer a Processing graphics
application is running, and continuously receives data from the Wiring I/O board.

66

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

The data is interpreted making the graphics system to react according to the external manipulation of the light cubes and reflected on the tables’ surface.
Exhibited at Milan Triennale, This is Today. L’invasione degli ultracorpi interattivi.
April 15-19 2004

4.6. Prototyping aids
Software programs and libraries to support the interconnection of different tech-

73
Reactive Tables

nologies are very easy to identify while prototyping interaction design projects. A
considerable amount of work in this direction has been done at different schools,
making available to students software libraries and applications that allow them
to interface diverse technologies in the daily prototyping of interactive devices.
One that was very common at IDII was the need to transfer information from/to
a physical device to/from a computer, sometimes not only to transfer to/from
one but to many computers in a network.

74
Reactive Tables

To fulfill this need I designed an application that allows students to send and
receive data from or to any kind of microcontroller (including the Wiring I/O
board) that is connected to a computer’s serial port, to software applications like
Macromedia Flash to other computers in the network. What this software does
is to open the serial port to communicate with the microcontroller and creates
a network server that transmits this data to any network client that connects to
this server. Macromedia Flash doesn’t have access to the computer’s serial port,
but has access to the network, so in this case users can connect Flash using its
Actionscript language to my interface server, and send and receive data from the
microcontroller. This allows for quick prototyping in certain projects, by combining the Flash multimedia capabilities with the realm of hardware.

72
Reactive Tables

Data can also be received by other software applications or programs developed
in Java, C, or any other language with network connection capabilities.
At the moment this software is being used by students at IDII in a wide variety
of prototypes, at the ITP program at NYU, the Massachusetts College of Art in
Boston and Dublin City University in Ireland.

68

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

4.7 Class support material
Class aid tools are very important in education, not only for communication
purposes but also for the class development, and also as reference for future
generations of students and the community in general.
In collaboration with my friend Mauricio Giraldo, I developed a courseware system based on previous courseware experiences at Interaction design Institute
Ivrea and the MIT Media Lab.
By analyzing features available in Casey Reas’ Points & Pixels courseware, DBN
courseware at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Lab and
Networked mode

Reed Kram’s courseware for the Controlmania class, we developed a system to
support teachers and students in the daily class activities. Taking what we considered the most important features of each of these courseware systems, we
combined them into the new one. The courseware system is now part of the
Processing project.
Educators can create, edit, modify and consult all the course components (classes, students, problem sets, references, schedule, and syllabus). Students can
post, edit and modify solutions to problem sets, document and present their
work, and visualize their classmates’ solutions to problem sets, thereby facilitating the learning process.

Single computer mode

75

Prototyping modes in which the server is appropriate

Solutions to problem sets can include Interactive media files like Processing applets, Macromedia SWF format files, Apple QuickTime movies, or popular for-

Soeren Pors’ Fight Suit project was one of the first projects at Interaction Design

mats for images on the Web, like PNG, GIF, JPEG etc. The solution can also include

Institute Ivrea that used the server to read data from an accelerometer con-

text or HTML formatted text, as well as links to other Web sites. The system also

nected to a microcontroller and send it to a prototype application developed in

provides the web interface for external people to be able to visualize the class

Macromedia Flash.

activities. Solutions can be visualized by student or by problem set, making it
possible to view an individual student’s work or the class solution’s work for a

Connecting Flash and the microcontroller was the backbone that enabled the de-

specific problem.

velopment of the Fight Suit prototype (www.fightsuit.com). It took a lot of hard
76

work from Yaniv Steiner to control the accellerometer input, but we ended up with
perfect punch response. The Flash connection opened up a new range of prototyping possibilities to normal folks like me. (Soeren Pors, 2004)

Fightsuit prototype
Soeren Pors, 2004

The graphic layout of the class Web site is completely customizable through CSS
and XHTML. The system includes an initial default layout, and English and Spanish language files. More will come as more people use it on their activities.
The first version of this software was available in the summer of 2003 and a new
version is currently available for users to download. It requires a one-time instal-

70

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

lation per server; detailed instructions are available in the courseware web site.
Once the system is installed running, it is possible to create as many courses as
needed. It is built on of open source GNU tools and the code was made available
to the community. At the moment it is being used at the University of Los Andes
in Bogotá, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Carnegie Mellon University School of Design, and the Ateneo in Manila. The courseware has also been
used to support Processing workshops.

77
Snapshots of the Courseware system in use at different schools

72

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

5. Conclusions and Future Direction

As was the experience with Processing, I expect that my running of workshops
will help me gain the necessary teaching experience as I more finely tune the
curriculums to achieve the goals of the project.
I devised this project to be used along with Processing to teach in academic environments; doing the initial learning-to-program steps with Processing, then
moving into learning basic electronics with Wiring and doing things in parallel.
Both will complement each other in taking the user’s design experiences into the
physical world.
The Wiring programming environment will be subject of constant improvements;
that’s the nature of software. At the moment an initial version with the basic
API is released; but major changes in the software will happen in the following
months to reflect the implementation of additional libraries and functionality, as

This project has been an incredible design challenge in on every level. From elec-

well as to include development environment improvements done for Processing,

tronics to visual design, it forced me to execute tasks that required many skills.

since Processing and Wiring share the programming environment.

In this sense it has been an amazing learning experience.
Another important feature that will be added for the next release is the support
I found obstacles at every turn; some were challenging problems, others more

for some of the lower-end microcontrollers of the Atmel AVR Atmega family, to

like dead ends that forced me to step back and try a different approach.

satisfy the user’s needs to deploy higher number of prototypes of its designs in a
more cost-effective manner.

For my experience, it was very important to keep open to change and alternatives; it is easy to get caught into something that makes us feel comfortable,

Massive amounts of work have to be done in the communication and documen-

specially being in love with technology. In that sense I think my experience as an

tation parts of the project. The Wiring web site will be a constant challenge re-

artist and designer helped me in achieving some balance and getting alternative

garding this matter.

perspectives of the problems involved in this project.
The I/O Board hardware is designed to last for a longer period of time without
This project is just starting; a considerable amount of work has to be done to

major changes. The Wiring board is powerful and flexible enough for the actual

take it further and to the extent I intended. From my thesis work, Wiring is in its

and future needs of physical interaction design projects in the coming months.

initial stage. Now the tools need to be tuned and perfected through the experience and use in school environments and by the community in general.
I am very excited and challenged with the work done, and the expected question:
what’s next? Everything! I think. It is also exciting to think of the kind of works
that hopefully people will do with Wiring.
Processing has opened a path for this project, not only in terms of community,
teaching methodologies or technology; however, only the use and experience of
Wiring will give me the necessary insights for improvements.

74

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

6. References

Stang, Pascal, AVRmini Boards, Santa Clara University, Nov 9 2003, <http://hubbard.engr.scu.edu/embedded/avr/avrmini>
Bishop, Durrell, Durrell Bishop, <http://www.durrellbishop.com>

diSessa, Andrea A., Edward H. Lay, The Berkeley BOXER Project, February 25 2002,
<http://dewey.soe.berkeley.edu/boxer.html/index.html>

Verplank, Bill, Bill Verplank, <http://www.billverplank.com>

Kay, Alan, Squeakland, May 2004, <http://www.squeakland.org>

Banzi, Massimo, potemkin.org, <http://www.potemkin.org>

Logo Cmputer Systems Inc., Microworlds, May 2004, <http://www.microworlds.

Reas, Casey, GroupC.net / REAS, April 2004, <http://www.groupc.net>

com>
UCLA Design | Media Arts, UCLA Design | Media Arts / SenseLab, April 2004, <
Maeda, John, Tom White, Ben Fry, Jessica Rosenkrantz, Design By Numbers, Aes-

http://dma.ucla.edu/senselab>

thetics + Computation Group. Design By Numbers website. MIT Media Laboratory
Aesthetics + Computation Group. Cambridge, August 2 2003, <http://dbn.media.

O’Sullivan, Dan, Dan O’Sullivan, ITP NYU, May 2004, <http://fargo.itp.tsoa.nyu.

mit.edu>

edu/~dano>

Reas, Casey, Ben Fry, Processing, MIT Media Laboratory and Interaction Design

Igoe, Tom, Tom Igoe, ITP NYU, May 2004, <http://stage.itp.nyu.edu/~tigoe>

Institute Ivrea, May 2004, <http://www.processing.org>
Berzowska, Joanna, Joanna Berzowska, Concordia University, May 2004, <http://
Martin, Fred, Fred’s World, University of Massachusetts LOWEL, Jan 27 2004,

hybrid.concordia.ca/~joey>

<http://www.cs.uml.edu/~fredm/>
Nimoy, Josh, The Work of Josh Nimoy, ITP NYU, March 2004, <http://www.jtnimoy.
Massachusets Institute of Technology, 6.270 MIT’s Autonomous Robot Design

com>

Competition, 2004, <http://www.mit.edu:8001/courses/6.270/home.html>
Stang, Pascal, SCU Robotics Systems Laboratories, Santa Clara University, April 1
Martin, Fred. The Handy Board, handyboard.com, Aug 27 2003, <http://www.

2003, <http://hubbard.engr.scu.edu/embedded>

handyboard.com>
Lawson, Cynthia, Physical Computing, ITP NYU, 2003, http://stage.itp.tsoa.nyu.
MIT Media Laboratory Future of Learning Group, GoGo Board, MIT Media Labora-

edu/~cl457/pcomp

tory, April 5 2004, <http://learning.media.mit.edu/projects/gogo>
Co, Elise, elise co, Aesthetics + Computation Group. MIT Media Laboratory, AuGalbraith, Megan, Simon Greenwold, Justin Manor, nylon, MIT Media Laboratory,

gust 8 2001, <http://acg.media.mit.edu/people/elise>

Aesthetics + Computation Group, 2002, <http://acg.media.mit.edu/projects/nylon>

Koser, Mikkel, Drawing Machine Project, Interaction Design, Royal College of Art,
May 2003, <http://proce55ing.beyondthree.com/tutorial/drawingmachine>

Galbraith, Megan, megan galbraith master’s thesis, Embedded Systems for Computational Garment Design, 2003, <http://acg.media.mit.edu/people/megan/the-

Van Ooijen, Wouter, Eur van Andel, Mark Gross, Javier Martinez, Craig Franklin,

sis.html>

Jal - Just Another Language, June 4 2003, <http://jal.sourceforge.net>

76

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Parallax Inc. Stamps in Class, Parallax Bbasic Stamp, <http://www.parallax.com/

Zadeh, Lotfi , BISC Program; Soft Computing The Berkeley Initiative on Soft

html_pages/edu/index.asp>

Computing, Berkeley University of California, 2003, <http://www.cs.berkeley.
edu/~zadeh>

Netmedia Inc. BasicX by NetMedia Inc., <http://www.basicx.com>
Mann, Steve, Wearable Computing, University of Toronto, 2003, <http://about.
Microchip, Microchip Technology. Inc Home Page, May 2004, <http://www.micro-

eyetap.org/library/weekly/aa061500a.shtml>

chip.com>
Verplank, Bill, Physical Interaction Design – Autumn 2002, Interaction Design
Atmel Corporation, Atmel AVR 8-Bit RISC Homepage, May 2004, <http://www.

Institute Ivrea, 2002, <http://www.interaction-ivrea.it/courses/2002-03/physical-

atmel.com/products/AVR>

computing>

Atmel Corporation, AT91 Arm-based Microcontrollers Homepage, May 2004,

Banzi, Massimo, InflatedEgoTeachingPhysicalComputing, Interaction Design

http://www.atmel.com/products/AT91/

Institute Ivrea, 2003, <http://conncomm.interaction-ivrea.it/zope/inflatedego/
TeachingPhysicalComputing>

Systronix Inc, JStamp™, 2003, <http://www.systronix.com/jstamp>
Verplank, Bill, Max Mathews, MUSIC 250a / CS377C – HCI Theory and Practice,
Maxim/Dallas Semiconductor Corp., TINI: Introducing TINI, 2004, <http://www.

Human Computer Interaction Design Stanford University, 2004, <http://ccrma-

ibutton.com/TINI/index.html>

www.stanford.edu/courses/250a>

Rabbit Semiconductor, Rabbit Semiconductor | Microprocessors and Develop-

ETH, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Wearable Computing Lab : Welcome

ment tools for Embedded Control and Communications, 2004, <http://www.rab-

to the Wearable Computing Lab, ETH, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zur-

bitsemiconductor.com>

ich, Jan 4 2004, <http://www.wearable.ethz.ch>

Makingthings LLC, PRODUCTS, 2004, <http://www.makingthings.com/products/

Seymour, Sabine, fashionable technology, Parsons School of Design Center for

products.htm>

New Design, 2003, <http://a.parsons.edu/~fashiontech>

Infusion Systems, Infusion Systems :: I-CubeX, MIDI sensor control for research,

FSF Europe, FSF Europe – Education – Argumentation, Why give precedence to

education, art, music, dance and more, 2003, <http://www.infusionsystems.

Free Software at school?, Free Software Foundation Europe, February 2 2003,

com>

<http://fsfeurope.org/projects/education/argumentation.en.html>

Pond Electronics, Pond – Embedded Systems Products, 2003, <http://www.pond.

Utterback, Camille, Fang-Yu Lin, Major Studio - Physical Computing, Spring 2002,

ie/products/index.htm>

Parsons School of Design, 2002, <http://a.parsons.edu/~linf/pc/sp02>

MIT Media Laboratory, aesthetics + computation group, MIT media laboratory,

Camarata, Ken, Mark D Gross, Ellen Yi-Luen Do, [dmg . publications . Physical

2004, <http://acg.media.mit.edu>

Computing: A Design Studio that Bridges Art, Science, and Engineering], Washington University, March 13 2003, <http://dmg.caup.washington.edu/xmlSiteEn-

Interactivity Consultants, Physical Interactivity and Interaction Design School

gine/browsers/stylin/publication134.html>

Guide, 2003, <http://www.interactivityconsultants.com/pages/alternate_indexes/LowF_interactivity_curriculum_education.htm>

78

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Winograd Terry, From Computing Machinery to Interaction Design, Stanford
University Program in Human-Computer Interaction, 1997, <http://hci.stanford.

Apendix A. Wiring I/O Board
Circuit Schematics

edu/~winograd/acm97.html>
McCullough, Malcolm, Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand, MIT Press,
1998.
Pors, Soeren, Fightsuit, 2004, <http://www.fightsuit.com>
Myers, B., Creating Interaction Techniques by Demonstration, appears in Visual
Programming Environments: Paradigms and Systems, Ed. Ephraim P. Glinert,
1990.
Norman, D. A., Things that make us smart, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1993.
Maeda, John. Design By Numbers, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 1999.
Jones, Joseph L., Flynn Anita M., Seiger Bruce A., Mobile Robots, Ed. A K Peters,
Ltd. 1999.
Kernighan B. W., D. M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1978. Second edition, 1988
D. Svanaes, Understanding Interactivity. Steps to a Phenomenology of HumanComputer Interaction, Phd Thesis, Trondheim, 1999.
Atmel Corporation, 8-Bit AVR Microcontroller with 128K Bytes In-System programmable Flash ATMega128 ATMega128L Preliminary, 2003.
Atmel Corporation, AVR061: “STK500 Communication Protocol”, Application
Note, 2003.
Atmel Corporation, AT91 ARM® Thumb® Microcontrollers, AT91R40008, Summary, 2003.
Atmel Corporation, AT91 ARM® Thumb® Microcontrollers, AT91R40008, Electrical Characteristics, 2003

80

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

Apendix B. Wiring I/O Board Layout

Colophon
This document was prepared with Adobe InDesign.
The text of this thesis was set on 14 points of lead in eight point Caecilia (1991),
designed by Peter Matthias Noordzij and issued by Linotype in 1991.
The Wiring I/O board circuit was designed and laid out using Cadsoft Eagle Freeware Light Edition. <http://www.cadsoft.de>

82

WIRING . HERNANDO BARRAGAN

84

